To:  mmarconi@netcom.com, grahambell@aol.com, grever@ibr8smtp...From:  Sarah Date:  9/8/96  23:17Subject:  When did you know? Somebody on the autism list asked the subject question. One mother remembered thinking, "If I just love her more, she'll love me back." Here's a copy of my answer. Laurel was born in June 1987, a couple of months after Psychology Today had this big anniversary issue covering the life cycle. It stated that a baby only a few days old would imitate facial expressions. So when I brought Laurel home from the hospital, I made faces at her. She'd smile and giggle but never made any attempt to imitate me. I thought this was odd. I mentioned it to a doctor, who sarcastically said, "Well, I would believe everything you read in Psychology Today." Laurel was so terrified of the blow dryer and vacuum cleaner noises that I didn't use them at all; I put thrift store sheets down on the floor, gathered and washed them when they got dirty. She could work the VCR and stereo independently since she was able to crawl. She didn't like the music I selected (Beethoven, classic rock) but kept tuning in a country station  which I hate! At one year, Laurel was playing peek-a-boo with everything like she invented the game. She never spoke, but she would stay up for hourse in the night, playing peek-a-boo with the moon.But she didn't reach to be picked up, speak* any words clearly, point or wave, and she had no discernible word for "mama." I remember commenting to someone that babies were said to be loving, but really, at that age, they just saw parents as tools to deliver food and warmth and entertainment. Children just develop at different rates, my pediatrician said. At seven months, Laurel was riding on my shoulders and accidentally scratched my eye. Tthe opthalmologist  flipped a console switch that lit up a toy monkey in the corner.  This was supposed to keep her occupied and quiet while he looked at my eye. The monkey chittered and banged cymbals. Laurel didn't look. The doctor switched the monkey off and on again. Laurel looked at the switch. The doctor did not say anything, but I could hear him thinking that something was not right with this child. Laurel was "kicked out" of day care when she was 26 months old.  One day, she simply started screaming.  And didn't stop screaming for about two years.  We went to Dr. Jacobsen, who at first put it down to colic, then said it couldn't be that bad.  Then he sent me to a psychiatrist, Dr. Graybill, who convinced me to put Laurel away for a week at Oak Ridge Institute, just to get "Mom's" head in the right space.   Obviously, the   problem was a faulty mother/child bonding and going away would simply fix the problem.  I was so desperate for anything that I did this.  I came back nine days later to a silent stranger.  And I walked out of there with her in my arms.  Surely anything I did was better than sucking the soul out of her.  This was a disaster.   But seeing Laurel crushed that way gave me the strength to stand the noise.  We got used to it and called it normal.  I could not get a job, nor leave the house.   I got back together with Laurel's father, and things were semi-ok for about two days.About nine months later, Laurel's sister Janet was born.  Not only did Laurel keep on screaming, but she refused to change any of her ways.  Laurel simply didn't recognize Janet in any way, shape, or form. I mean, Janet might as well have been a shoe. She didn't step on her, but neither did she acknowledge the baby in any way. "Sibling rivalry, of course," my friends said.  "Yeah, just like marriage is necrophilia," I said.  They didn't get the joke. If there was one. I took Laurel to pediatricians, audiologists, neurologists, psychologists, etc.  The audiologist said that results were inconclusive.  Three pediatricians said, Wait and see.  The neurologist said it was a worried mother syndrom and suggested I see a psychiatrist. Psychiatrists ranged from schizophrenic to severly retarded (and their diagnoses went with them)--Badump. Ching.I arranged for Laurel to be in an extraordinary day care led by the wife of the principal of the demonstration school (the public school that tries out new curriculum and teaching techniques). Laurel simply didn't see the adults or other kids. She might hold onto someone as she maneuvered the step into the back yard, but it was as if they were objects and not people. While the other children colored or listened to stories, Laurel played with the dishwasher and the vertical blinds. When I came to pick her up, she never heard me. I would call for her at the door and continue calling for her as I walked through the house, until I was standing right next to her. Eventually, she would look up, and her face would fill with joy. Yet at home, she would come running in from the bedroom when the opening music of her favorite video played ever so softly. And when I hummed to her, she'd match my tone. I took her to an audiologist. She was diagnosed, "not deaf." Wait and see. I took her to a pediatric neurologist. Laurel was again diagnosed "not deaf. Does not play appropriately with toys." But I couldn't find work and the divorce played havoc with our finances. When Laurel was three and a half, I made an appointment with the Children's Hospital's speech and language lab for evaluation. My Dad said, "Fine, do it your way," rolled his eyes. This is my Dad's way of saying that whatever I am doing is idiotic and any fool can see that. So I said, "No. If you've got something to say to me, say it." He told me that Laurel was not just delayed in speech; the way she related to people, the way she played, even the way she looked at things were different. I called Children's Hospital and asked for a more complete evaluation. After two weeks of testing (optical, audio, OT, PT, SLP, psych workups, genetics, fragile X, blood, urine, I don't know what all), Dr. Mollie O'Malley (doesn't that sound like a Dr. Seuss character?) sat across a table from me and, with eyes moist with concern, somber face and halting voice said, "Did you ever think it might be. . . autism?" I was in shock. Dr. Malley recommended I see Dr. Kathleen Frawley for a second opinion. So a few days later, we went to see Dr. Frawley. Laurel didn't want to draw dots and circles. She wanted the necklace on Kathleen's neck, and she grabbed for them nearly choking the good doctor. Kathleen silently handed over the string of bright yellow beads, and Laurel lowered them slowly up and down, just at the edge of her vision. Kathleen said, "Yep, she's autistic." And she might as well have been saying, "She's two" or "She has brown eyes." And that quickly, I realized that autism was just a word; it meant what I believed it meant. Life-consuming tragedy or just another trait and Laurel was still the same sweet, beautiful little girl she was before I'd ever heard that word.##higher##lower___________________Sarah/ Moon/ Laurel___________________ 